**American Beauty: It’s Right on the Money**

Those are sacred words - so too ‘In God *We* Trust'. There is no ‘US’ in ‘We’ and gazing back from the azure God only sees us.

Money is a technology and *we* (all of us together) need to evolve with leadership that acknowledges our oneness by building a platform that fosters global partnership and collaboration; any competition is ultimately about our better angels constantly seeking a new personal best.

*Transparency* will separate a technology that does harm from one that does good. Only a technology that draws a strand that traces from the ‘one’ (our private key) to ‘many’ (our public key) securely will work. America must lead because the 'spec' is on the 'specie'. And brevity being the soul of wit, America gets points for style - but really needs to pick up the pace on delivery and execution. As things stand, however, the global hegemon is on ground that still tremors from the echoes of the Great Financial Crisis of 2008

**The giant that walks around you seeing through your petty lives?**

I found David Graeber’s [Debt](https://www.amazon.ca/Debt-Updated-Expanded-First-Years/dp/1612194192/ref=sr_1_1?crid=M88AXWO6CZ00&dib=eyJ2IjoiMSJ9.34MX0YDZZuKCoeWBbYLUZijFli7S1i0v1CtE8HSDy1ZZLThc5uMukpva8WEKnAWeP7A3SYaFRkPeSEWfvGDftYJ0RNhNQeOsWiFaL-3PN8RNq-QeGOC1nRqKbD1lxhpgJpHmCZsIV6xfgXN0P6ZfPh-yjlNfYm7rDG2w_sFgb3hHSDwJB-DEq17yP7O0Riii8z8Mp_weju_XauNPPM88I3kuK_aj81qVir2v1fZ3Mj8.XGlm0Mo30mIC_wNGCMxquKIP55vy6zCJT1ZXejkBTa8&dib_tag=se&keywords=debt+the+first+5000+years&qid=1716773287&sprefix=debt+the%2Caps%2C215&sr=8-1), which I referenced [earlier](https://transition-insight.com/f/the-promise-of-blockchain-and-ai-the-prehistoric-ledger) in the aftermath of the Great Financial Crisis and the emergence of Satoshi Nakamoto’s [whitepaper](https://bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf); it circulated widely  in the emergent crypto community as a backgrounder on the nature ‘money’ - which we use daily without much thought. 

I came to it because weirdly the question wasn’t addressed in my otherwise comprehensive education - which included an excellent Master’s in International Political Economy. We should never get so far before understanding money - because our misconceptions about it lie at the heart of our problems in life and our complacency on the subject of money is so comprehensive as to seem induced - almost *‘manufactured’.*

The problems stemming from our ignorance compounds in our lives and in our society over time to the point at which the subject becomes a matter of public discourse. The  first, lazy and instinctive thought is “conspiracy!” But as Kahneman points out even elite undergrads struggle with this basic arithmetic: 

*A bat and a ball together cost $1.10. The bat costs $1.00 more than the ball. How much does the ball cost?*

If this has the best of us stumped because we don’t stop to think. Then how much more thought is required to understand something so arithmetically complex as the global monetary system before we stop jumping to the stupid conclusion that periodic systemic money fails are caused by hoarding globalists?

It’s a tragic tradition that points a finger at those living by the tenets of a simple idea: *time is valuable and needs to be priced - and paid for*. It’s a problem that we grapple with in our oldest ethical traditions often badly because we struggle with defining the *objective* point at which this legitimate idea of lending capital becomes *usury* - a sin but one too loosely defined.

But in a world of accelerating disparity between ‘Have’ and ‘Haven’t’, Pulp’s [anthem](https://open.spotify.com/track/0NWnWSkFT6p01JDgmQxbTT) from which the subtitle above comes, strikes an angry chord and induces righteous anger in the souls of common people. They look to the sovereign for answers.

Leviathan in turn seeks to [grab](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Executive_Order_6102#:~:text=Executive Order 6102 required all,in 2023) per troy ounce.) what we in tech call a ‘honey pot’. If it fails it does so only because the honey is spread widely - *decentralized*.

The tragedy of course is when the honeypot is squarely in your sites because of 2,000 years of wretched [hate](https://www.worldjewishcongress.org/en/news/a-third-of-nazis-war-effort-funded-with-money-stolen-from-jews-study-finds) -  and centralized. 

But Pulp’s anthem resounds with optimism in end - if we can rouse ourselves to the insights required to make a transition to something new:

*“I spy the chance*

*To change the world”*

**All Structures are Unstable**

Stable architectures are secured by multiple struts distributed widely - bridges, arches, buildings - they avoid single points of failure. Cross-disciplinarity helps with the examination of the problem and we have an internet that resembles a dilapidated unstable building with all the appearances of security and privacy - one rife with opportunities for exploitation. *Only murder in the building*.

but this is now an information technology problem because we exchange value increasingly online - and online, beneath an opaque surface new source of value (data) is not only not fairly distributed to its creators and owners (but hoarded by the few - some well-known and our solace here is that they are for the most part *relatively* fair-minded and competent - the pair I like to call ‘Truth and Beauty - Microsoft and Google for example.

Online our monetary reality is generated through the confluence of our personal biases which come together to construct, escalate and amplify a transactional framework that is opaque - fundamentally a black box devoid of transparency. Offline, at least the aware among us have the ‘[Gift of Fear](https://www.amazon.ca/The-Gift-of-Fear/dp/0316235776/ref=sr_1_1?crid=3EIMS4PTCI6IQ&dib=eyJ2IjoiMSJ9.DC9BZ2S6bYx1A1hmkETx16M_GMPG3oB55uiGVCyYb39cL0gK2RXOuBpiyLCiA6K4TBI_bRbYgeQjUgE1hwoM-ZuJmg3srv_wn_qPJedp5Y51UNCl0jtwoNGku3Xoc23iOphLmcRUGURannSqbusJ_8a6eBmJWFi-4pxR-ul7EmaTLOcQYl8kedEEyIiaQqkrxUKKmJ6VfEwhNnuPpQWVNbpkghuf7NlJ_YJgMM7V0w5tbny_CQ9srRteGDAuE2fahjJDOzlu3_zq9TNElMxXQVzGbO1-S9R5oyEYO7NMnEE.8DdkAX0YUiWGeBolHuRpN8eGX8wcEObBNsBTAjW3XsA&dib_tag=se&keywords=gift+of+fear&qid=1717434387&sprefix=gift+of+fear%2Caps%2C88&sr=8-1)’:  “*senses working over-time trying to tell the difference 'tween the goods and grime, turds and treasure"* and ultimately separate that which gives us pain from that which gives us pleasure. (In a word - risk).

Online we cannot cleanly draw these distinctions - we discern clearly by the ads and images thrown up into our faces that Leviathan, through its corporate proxy servers trades and traffics our humanity (not the visceral slavery of the south, but the cerebral slavery of the north and west.) 

This grows ever more problematic as the complexity (the macro social graph) of our global economy - the degree to which we interact with each other and those around the globe grows ever more complex. It is a game theoretical architectural problem that permits a classical prisoner’s dilemma - wherein each party acts in their self-interest but without the transparency required to synthesize from it an outcome that is optimal for the whole.

Writ large, starting with the hegemon and then cascading outwards towards the periphery on a global macro scale we have a circumstance that enables personal gain for people or institutions - corporates or sovereigns - or rather those of their ‘civil officers’ (arguably neither civil nor deserving rank). That possess privileged access to what we call ‘Production’ in tech (essentially the real world).

All the while the ‘externalities’ are borne by the public at large until they periodically break out into a crisis. The costs of this system needing routine heavy maintenance and cost (regulatory oversight and a legacy technology stack) doesn’t fall equitably and is never settled - social and technical debt accumulates until it reaches a fever pitch - a point at which institutional legitimacy  - so far gone that even the institutions charged with maintaining order (law enforcement and the military either  ‘lose the signal’ required to contain disorder or have themselves ‘switched off’; symptomatic of this breakdown at the core was the unimpeded invasion on 6 January 2021 of the United States Capitol - the very citadel of global power. I’m not sure which was responsible on the day - but either is alarming. Meanwhile at the periphery those who once offered partnership for peace now apply a policy of ‘Rubles for our enemies, bitcoin for our friends’ or explore de-dollarization - for which there’s now a new headline daily.

**Queen Street West - Tuned In, Turned on and Dropped In** 

We’ve meandered from a discourse on money to one about our online lives because the feature/bug of an unsecured internet allows people with the time, inclination and the skill to monetize us.

Not everyone has the inclination nor desire but anyone who has ever comparison-shopped groceries is really using data to put money in their pocket (or save it from falling out). in the mid-90s and had invested with considerable success as an amateur. I’d taken the [Canadian Securities Course](https://www.csi.ca/en/learning/courses/csc?gad_source=1&gclid=Cj0KCQjwpNuyBhCuARIsANJqL9Mv7Gw2ssYllL_1k6UKtGr-UaHdHuATpT4sFUrV5B1-vy7phNiXbm8aAiWKEALw_wcB) and *just absolutely loved investing* - not speculating, mind, but finding corporate yield - undervalued or high-yielding.  It was easy, fun and lucrative and my portfolio grew so quickly I even imagined having ‘Fuck You Money’ in short order.

But in 2008 the portfolio held well but it stalled. Nothing I tried - getting technical (charts), using derivatives (options), even tried to model volatility. Consistency was difficult to achieve and whatever naivete I had vanished when institutions started breaking their own rules to stop legal trades from working. I looked back in anger at the trillions [printed](https://www.youtube.com/watch?app=desktop&v=q6vi528gseA) - not created through - ingenuity nor labour - to save financial institutions. It’s as if the banks have a testnet faucet that’s ‘Prod’ for the rest of us. 

- 2008 and 2009 was a year of awakening for many reasons; I spent a lot of time at Toronto’s [Downward Dog](https://downwarddog.com/) Yoga Studio on the city’s Queen Street West a few hundred yards from where the Anarchist matriarch Emma Goldman lived and died - the woman immortalized by Green Day’s ‘She’s A Rebel’. I found a haven at the studio and its community - I dropped in early each morning - I had a key to place and many mornings I was the one to open its doors to the initiated; for the first few minutes I was  often solo and in darkness; slowly I breathed and through the span of ninety minutes of Ashtanga Vinyasa's primary series I watched the light and heat slowly rise and the room fill to the brim with bodies, our mats edge-to-edge; we all had our personal 'real-estate' in that space (funny that being yogis and all) and the uninitiated might risk a volley of 'who the fuck are you?' looks if they parked themselves in one of 'our' spots (and we knew who we were). In the midst of the turmoil outside, I floated from pose to pose obsessing about hegemony, anarchy, money and technology; I tuned into and fell in love with an anthropologist (a few yards in front of me, and to the left) and with her as my *drishti* I began my introversion; figuring out how it all fit together; we look around us - in our world online and off and sensed it was all breaking. Our things, our money, our souls. What’s going to make us whole? The clue lies with the rest of creation and the way it just seems to work without requiring a periodic reboot or upgrade; 'end of life' doesn't just creep up on it outside of warranty. The way we too once worked -  in our earliest days operating in transparency touched on [previousl](https://transition-insight.com/f/the-promise-of-blockchain-and-ai-the-prehistoric-ledger)y; the task is to scale that model with online information technology, including currencies - where we increasingly commune (live and work) that aligns individual and collective interests through monetary incentive.

This will ultimately resolve the generational cycles that have characterized human civilization - the *saecula*. The outcome as I see it is potentially an end to generational human trauma and 'The End Of History' that Francis Fukuyama was 'early' but not 'wrong' on. We're on the verge of 'exponential age' and the singularity that comes from its reflexive productivity. We'll explore the idea of idea of ethics (non-dualism, monism etc.) and how it relates to money next time.