



# Sine Qua Non 3: Anima - OK Computer #

## Introduction ##

In short our purpose is to examine what might constitute a human-centric system design imbued with a natural and organic intelligence that is efficient. We use the term 'emotional intelligence' or empathy broadly in street psychology to describe 'good people' vibe. A deeper understanding is required if we are to enable contracts with this intelligence which is why I frame it as Anima. This piece explores Anima and the elements with constitute it. The short answer is that through an anarchist lens crime, especially pre-meditated murder (which of course includes war) is a health matter (i.e. not intelligent).



## Animus ##

A heart that's full up like a landfill
A job that slowly kills you
Bruises that won't heal

You look so tired, unhappy
Bring down the government
They don't, they don't speak for us
~ Radiohead (No Surprises)

To understand Anima think of it as human intelligence - but *without* Animus (something absent in other fauna). Taking a *via negativa* approach we may then approach human-centric design to create systems that work for all.

Machina *before* humanity was the world as an 'OK' Computer - God's idea. The discussion mudra was the unseen and unspoken intelligence that flowed freely in abundance: A force of nature to make life on this third stone satellite a reality. It was one with God deeply embedded within *before* the complexity of civilization began to arise. Anima is a *human* idea that separates and categorizes to understand and model the universe but without a notional wholeness that is too complex and particulate to fully apprehend (Deus en Machina). The risk is that of course that the compelling model becomes the singular prism through which we see reality. Understanding that there is a (holy) ghost in the machine is critical. 

I wonder at how precocious child Mary Shelley would have been - to have grown up under the guidance of such farsighted parents in a country as prosperous and relative free as England. The daughter of anarchists William Godwin and Mary Wollstonecraft, of course wrote Frankenstein's Monster which in *summary* amounts to this: The corpse is not the sum of some ordinarily random parts assembled in an accustomed way in the manner of corporations (corps).

Now, London could be a dangerously bleak place in *those* times. The darker side of the freedom granted Englishmen is that denizens of some quarters were left to their own devices. Without the welfare state that emerged by the time I was born in a East London, a spiral of unfortunate circumstances might leave a person with few options but to (involuntarily) donate a heart perhaps; to some venture claiming research for some utilitarian 'greater good' (in the name of *modern* liberalism). The cruel calculus is hard to swallow but plausible. The incentive of a promised end is a slippery slope to justifying means that cannot and should not be countenanced in human-centric systems.

Living in a world where limbs and organs may now be safely removed and attached elsewhere is it not at least plausible that in the world wrought by the East India Company and its kind of *limited* liability legal personhood that some bright spark might set up a 'single-person' corporation to maximize revenue by amputating perfectly healthy limbs (from perfectly healthy people who are not yet corpses) making them far more profitable beggars while providing a 'greater good' for 'private healthcare'? I don't say that such things happen. But in this world it is, you must admit, at least plausible. You might even structure a corporation through Panama or the Caymans quite legally with some ingenuity. This is called 'clever' by the way and it is somewhat different from (holistic) intelligence. With our penchant for making things complicated we might call this 'Evil Artificial Intelligence'.

That's the crude arithmetic of quarterly results where the sum is greater than its parts. You don't want to believe that it happens and I don't want to live in a world where I imagine someone *executing* such a business model. In my best of all worlds those guilty of pre-meditate murder would be safely sequestered but free and given a way to good health, prosperity and peace; not executed as retribution and then 'harvested' like some utility. Call it a humane form of device-enabled 'limited liability'. Granted, in the real world needs must and pragmatism is relevant but it's done arbitrarily with allowances for privileges and courtesies that an anarchist cannot abide especially when the technology is available and those of us who understand it can imagine an alternative version of reality.

The line from the Bard was 'What *a* piece of work is man'. Have you ever marvelled at a tailor's work? It is something to cut and assemble material well - no small project if done with care so as not to waste fabric. Owning an off-the-shelf suit that fits as well a Banana Republic makes them is enough of a flex for me. Having already bought it, I'll care for it and wear it for the practical thing a suit is.

Shelley's larger point was perhaps a different one: we *already* have machines to make men (and they are called mothers) so why go to the trouble of using weird science for the purpose? She presaged Nietzsche's more masculine version of the same message. We have replaced God or rather put ourselves in his place: 'We'll take it from here Thanks'. It was a salient argument in the age of autonomous engines (man-made machines) such as those weaving fabric in Blake's dark satanic mills and moving locomotive engines that had us suddenly realizing we had to account in our schedules for the variances between solar and clock time even in the short space between say London and Greenwich - now essentially the same place.

The point was this: 'How *much* abundance is enough?' And how particular and precise do you want to be about practical results and getting somewhere? At what point does 'research and development' become a flex? It is so absurd a question as to posit its own answer: The truth is that the cast was dyed in the wool and the wolf that came in from became friend and shepherd. The Lion, or as close as there was to one in a country already shorn of them for 10,000, years already lay with lambs and *we* in our Eden or rather *New Jerusalem* made it so. Is that not enough?

This conversation is about intelligence and technology - and not about how to get 'clever' with bad money governed poorly in the totality of our realm *Regnum Dei*. On the matter of technology ask why authors centuries on from Mary Shelley print on paper that might still be trees. 

As an anarchist I dream of trees and even beautiful giant stones - I'll show you one in Algonquin that is miraculously huge - the size of a house and straddled with white quartz. I've read Edward Abbey and I don't need the Moab to understand him. Why all these maddening crowds with their incessant noise? These were questions that the transcendentalists were asking almost 200 years ago and ones to which we are still trying to finesse an answer because everything is a priority.

Now I ask you, If I think I am privileged because I am not forced to surrender a kidney or lung then what do you suppose I should think of a three-hour commute to what David Graeber considers a bullshit job? One that now offers little opportunity for personal growth and that has me wasting energy in pursuit of things I do not want. And what should I think of the vast majority who still continuously toil? It's not much their pointless effort and time - that's there's to use as they see fit - but the destruction they are manifesting through it to what we share. Even as I glimpse the prospect of a new approach to order - a way out of our morass -  so many others are determined through inertia to stay in a groove driving an ever deeper scar into the planet. This is difficult to accept and live with.

 

## Paranoid Android ##

As we hive off into communities male and female aspects of a society perform different roles. The feminine aspect of man (anima) is that which will listen and discuss to yolk community rather than immediately resort to force to aggrandize. The male aspect of the female (animus) meanwhile looks to keep and hold what has already been secured, fearful that coercion and force will one day leave offspring wanting lest the patriarch *compromises* through transactional behaviour which structurally undermines the collective her matriarchy has nursed into being with care in the household. This is the inner tension in our collective with which we struggle as we simultaneously reconcile it with its reciprocal personality in the 'other'. These internal machinations are the paranoid android gripped panic and fear or alternatively pride and prejudice as we encounter the 'alien us'. The contemplative seeks to overcome this negativity by emanating the positive and constructive elements of Anima - intelligence without without which a personality risks being swept up by animus which represents emotion that is hostile or defensiveness. 

Anima has five dimensions:

- A connection: a shared notion of what constitutes a high-fidelity commitment

- Empathy: an understanding of the things that makes the 'other' distinct as a stakeholder from oneself

- Clock time: a shared sense of what constitutes time (and critically what time is worth) in context and the objectives or milestones that a journey of shared time (roadmap) entails

- Memory: A shared ledger, if you will, which immutably expresses what is commonly and transparently known and accepted as truth

- Shared Purpose: We gravitation around a distilled outcome becoming from many one - *E Pluribus Unum*. This is our notional capital. Whatever the legal *ownership* of capital in a very real sense it is a shared utility

  

What makes this anarchy is that anima is *sufficiently* expressed in masculinity through the absence of coercive energy -  either emotional or physical (violence) on a person. The fine line becomes nuanced in practice as incumbent participants in a polity resort to tactics required to achieve outcomes (electoral victory). Anima is essentially love without possessiveness; an abiding affection which neither wants or needs anything. Love that does not require the 'other' to requite - nor even offer even negligible social credit. This removes paranoia and what is left is abstract identity (id) that contains both masculine and feminine aspects in a bespoke balance of androgyny. What this means is that we are not the same (which is to say we are not identical) but we are each of *equivalent* worth or value in Creation as starting point for discussion. This notion is central to reconciliation and wholeness and demands the removal of arbitrary preference (i.e. bias)



## But Is It Yoga? ##

अचिन्त्य भेदाभेद तत्त्व
Like the flower and the scent of summer
like the sun and shine
Well the truth may come in strange disguises
Send the message to your mind.
~ Kula Shaker (Tattva)

The word *tattva* in Sanskrit translates to "principle," "truth," or "essence." It refers to the fundamental reality or the essential nature of something. In Indian philosophy, *tattva* is used to describe foundational principles of existence or elements of the universe. In spiritual or philosophical contexts, *tattva* denotes the true nature of reality or a principle underlying existence, aiming to reveal deeper truths about self, life, and consciousness. That true nature radiates beauty.

In the Commons, our space for discussion or conversation, *ugly* is shorthand for dissonant - asymmetry too obvious to co-exist with order and something which requires attention. It is the opposite of 'beauty' which is alignment, reason or logic that is intuitively apprehended through the five dimensions of anima. The divination of truth to discern what is *not beauty* and so requires transformation is this process. This is the essential meaning of *satyam, shivam, sundaram*. 

Generally speaking one constructs by *creating* (building or erecting), this is done through open discussion that leads to fertile ideation through language that is free of arbitrary bias (censorship). One can be said to be allowed to express Lingam (लिङ्ग, literally mark or symbol). The realized linguistics or semantic perimeter make one who they are ('am-ness'). Hence semper idem (semantic perimeter of identity embodied).

Yoga is the practice of yoking self to creation through anima so that one encompasses masculine and feminine aspects of creation in *behaviour*. In India the Sannyasin was the contemplative who are after much deliberate introspection (a self-discussion in stillness without voice) and having seen through the pantomime of the Commons and its manufactured costumed fiction would walk out of it to wander un-costumed (naked); performatively their transparent nakedness was their costume: an unspoken satyagraha that spoke truth to civilization's rigidly cast power structures that could not emanate wholeness. They saw no way to bridge the chasm between the vast fraud without and what they themselves had seen within and so they walked out. 

That's the ideal. Now civilization in its present mode is such that it encourages the opportunistic meme - merely the *veneer* of an idea and a path of least resistance to what is admittedly a version of what may be called 'the good life' *Degen rather than Scott and Helen Nearing's). Lucifer enlightens us and seeing an opportunity for indolence (efficiency) and licentiousness (procreation) - central rhetorical themes in what constitutes humanity, a melee ensues. Conferences are organized for the purpose. It is freedom untethered from responsibility and from accountability. This is the Last Man - a YOLO soft-nihilism before we settle into something more natural for the long run. Nietzsche's reset has us (and for that matter him) oscillate wildly into promiscuity before settling into a standard on what constitutes Regnum Dei. If not *entirely* wholesome it's just dessert: Dates with a few nuts as we examine the range of what constitutes the boundary of tolerable behaviour even it isn't accepted as comprehensively legitimate by some (kosher or ḥalāl).

 

## Self Sufficiency ##

Shiv, the patron of yogis however is *Sufi* - self-sufficient in a metaphorical and mystical solitude as an archetype and as platonic example of what it means to retire with meaning and intention: to be in one's own company as a palliative and practice like a John Galt or a Henry David Thoreau. To seek an understanding of self - and then bring it back to the world with*Calling* as God's gift. This is a practice to be cultivated as a component of life in the midst of culture.

To walk out on a problem *entirely* is irresponsible. As an alternative to walking away from the civilization of men is the opportunity to live and work within and yet in another paradigm. The ancient renunciates communed with nature giving up the world of men, but when you know that Creation itself is being assaulted by man, you cannot leave. You need to stand, deliver and defend. One obeys laws and one works as much or as little as one wants. Never for money but for the love of the labour and with a view as to how carefully capital is expended. Whether yours or not - it was hard-earned. This is why an anarchist ultimately no longer sees the Sovereign, Hegemon and their corporate agents as legitimate. They are no longer creative but running to stand still on a dreadful treadmill.

One reason I left the practice of yoga (as it is known in the west) is precisely because I found it increasingly performative, aesthetic and even, narcissistic. It is literally full of posers - and those naively mesmerized by the pose of one leading them on. In a sense it had become a slick corporate product - an earnest caricature lacking in self-awareness.

My own feeling is that the extravagant knots of the original sannyasin were presented as a mocking satire - a frightful mirror inspired by Kali and shown to a messy and disturbing society as it tied itself in masochistic narcistic knots designed to draw attention and make an impression: the same problems were clear to yogis thousands of years ago as they are now; this is a subtlety lost on those bending themselves painfully into some extremely weird poses unnecessarily and those assisting them into torn hamstrings. That said, I came away with some clever ideas as I shifted to urban and wilderness protocols and methods - strategic and tactical. These tune awareness in the world much as introspection does in the quiet warm moments before dawn where I cultivated a seated vipassana practice - I needed to slow right down.



## Sacred Feminine ##

Men in particular are concerned for the safety of their hearth and kin because the patriarchy and the patrimony, the primary institutions of the sovereign, even the hegemon's, is in the midst of collapsing. These are the dangerous times when people will shoot first and axe questions entirely. Meanwhile nurturing something out of nothing in the home has never not been this hard for so many for along time - arguably since the great depression. The ordinary, virtuous and the poor who refuse to cheat even a little will struggle disproportionately. But their stoicism and backbone is their strength and the salve and solution will be found from within through introspection. Death comes to all and it's better to have lived a while upright than stoop to those enslaved by a denuded sovereign (and his money) even just a little is their perspective - *this* is anima.

On the other hand, bear in mind that animus is the *masculine* aspect within the feminine psyche. This is the homestead's *domestic* and instinctively hostile and defensive energy felt towards the interloper - the 'other' - and particularly the male 'other' because panic and fear is widespread in a community and men (those that affiliate with institutional power in particular) appear defensive and prone to the  path of least resistance (blaming and shaming) versus the deliberate careful analysis required to plan and roadmap the solutions required. In short the circumstances have men at each others throats and making a lot of widows and widowers and (controversial statement here) thinking about giving up on their sex and transitioning to something preferably non-binary - or something that actually works for someone they actually like (regardless of their sex). 

I'm being facetious here: creative with literal truth without resorting to obvious falsehood to form archetypes in a way that I hope appeals to reason and intuition. However how do we solve this more systematically? We ask my daughters for a solution: First examining the flow (*Dhara*) of data, we look to see patterns that illuminate (*Diya*) insights. Then we discuss and plan with vision (*Drishti*) towards the horizon.

This is the idea of 'masculine' and 'feminine' energy in yoga; the Sun and Moon respectively heating and cooling together maintain the Planet in equilibrium as it travels.  Yoga extends the idea of holistic regulation in the associated philosophy of Ayurveda. Where one of three constitutions; Vata (Ether and Air) is responsible for movement, circulation, respiration, and nerve function. The other two are Pitta (Fire and Water) and Kapha (Earth and Water). The manifestation of balance in nature requires all three to be in equilibrium with Vata automating governance, heating and cooling, our behaviour to actuate a sustainable balance. Vata's Ether aspect amounts to the 'spaces within us and the ones we create between us' - the ones we were so concerned about during the lockdown. Humanity draws from Air, Fire and Earth, combining it with Ether to generate [*flow* ](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mihaly_Csikszentmihalyi) *to* create productively since the beginning. Holistically, in modern civilization, humanity needs a mechanism to regulate currency - that which flow between us - to manage scarce resources sustainably and assure perpetual abundance - [s*ine qua non*](https://transition-insight.com/?blogcategory=Sine+Qua+Non+(Humanity+%26+AI))  - without which, (there is) nothing for humans who wish to 'be' over the long run. 



## Into The Ether of Mind ##

*Gaia (or Anima)* is a myth *larger* than life - relevant even before life existed *for us*. We have myths to model *complex* social systems in context the way we model chemistry, physics and biology with those cute physical models in class. Vata is breath and Ether our interstitial aspect of inhalation/exhalation and expansion/contraction; one that needs credible and neutral expression in our technological architecture so that we may set an objective price to what we collectively need to value (including how time and notional capital is applied).

As a counterpoint to stillness there is motion and in creation it expresses a stillness that flows (*being* without toil). Just as yoga directs us to be inaction in action, so to the Dao's invocation is to be *in* vocation. The *Dao De Ching* counsels us to be like the water as it falls to it destination. For those of you in technology think of those waterfall projects. Remember how we used traceability in setting out a 'token' of value for the customer- a functional or non-functional requirement? Then carry it through the BRD (Business Requirements Document), SRS (System Requirements Specifications), the TDD (Technical Design Document) and TRD (Technical Requirements Document) yoking the documentation of those customer needs and wants through the length our software delivery lifecycle? Remember the pain when 'Business' couldn't precisely define which user journeys added most value or how? Our subjective guessing game continued as we finalized those requirements caused us to constantly update those documents - changing line items in the in-scope section of mandatory and nice to have functionality and caught up with the impossible question of trying to forecast how much value we could deliver in the calendar year? It wasn't really so much waterfall as a constant churn that went nowhere. 

Now imagine [DAOs](https://ethereum.org/en/dao/#what-are-daos) (distributed autonomous organizations) premised on a set of universally applicable values express through a protocol, defining objectively with data and analytics where value can be derived for our customers (the community that matters - our tribe). Capital is staked to the products and teams deliver that value - now the team is incentivized to deliver with care and quality - reduce the time and effort to deliver change by emphasizing quality. Imagine acceptance criteria objectively defined in a smart contract that 'defines done' as pre-requisite for passage through the CI/CD pipeline, with the team focused all the while focused on one priority (top of the backlog) delivered with quality before moving to the next. This again is the idea of Yoga (yoking) our work to the needs of our customers, aligned with the market as a whole - serving one without compromising the security of the whole.

Over time, the Turing-completeness of our AI will evolve to the extent that it incrementally better understands, through us and our products; ones that serve customers and evolve to meet their needs without compromising the those of the commons. The key to human-centric AI that dovetails private and public interests is having objective data interpreted by *public* blockchain networks in a relatively decentralized manner (to mitigate bias while making justifiable architectural trade-offs). All the while, costs are borne entirely by those who use the network and not in any sense externalized - that means proof of stake.

To understand the digital tokens secure nodes that verify and validate transactions on proof of stake networks better, ironically, a good starting point is our prehistoric past. Something we explore in the [Part ](https://transition-insight.com/f/the-promise-of-blockchain-and-ai-the-prehistoric-ledger)4 where I riff on the late anthropologist and anarchist David Graeber's take on our prehistoric past. Digital tokens are obviously not material in the physical sense - and we don't need our token to be a tangibly scarce commodity - those including gold are in any case too industrially valuable in a productive sense to use as tokens or hoard as a 'standard'. Similarly, prehistoric communities transacted value without material tokens.