The Japanese character for paddy field (田) is both literal and metaphysical: structure without possessiveness. It frames functional space for cultivation, not control. Stroke order matters—not because of tradition, but because efficiency becomes crucial when you’re learning thousands of characters. Routine develops with automaticity. Anarchy too, needs structure. Not imposition—but order that justifies itself through use. Happily our notional reality is bounded and finite as it is on earth - and within it you will discern Christ-consciousness (which if you know the stroke order, you will see as a pre-requisite for creating the enclosure). Now you know the meaning of *underlining* or to 'draw the line' or create a platform or set a foundation.

Those who came before me Lived through their vocations From the past until completion They'll turn away no more 

~ New Order ([Blue Monday](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9GMjH1nR0ds))

**Order: An Introduction**

This piece explores how the possession of (self-sovereign) order and structure is consistent and *necessary* to affect anarchy, which is not as 'consensus liberal democrats' would have you believe, antithetical to constructive behaviour. Anarchy is too often conflated with chaos. Whereas chaos implies randomness, anarchy implies creative and improvisational awareness to discern self-evident order and priority. In short-term 'vertical' cycles these become processes, routines or scripts which are validated *routinely* simply by being run and self-evidently resulting in positive change; they evolve as required. When these processes are applied with consistency and include a degree of introspection (an inward gaze that asks 'why' am I here) a 'horizontal' roadmap develops and through [attraction](https://transition-insight.com/transition-insight/f/attraction) may then be persisted in community to provide directional coherence to governance writ large (i.e. a roadmap). A high bar of practicing what is 'preached' is required before community may be discerned and approached. It's not enough to say 'one has to be the change'. One actually *has* to be the change (one wants to see in the world).

We'll apply this regime to policy later and do note, that from an anarchist perspective this example is relevant because anarchism asks you to personally take responsibility for your welfare and not to outsource it to the incumbent institutions. You may see this as a mundane even banal  example of how I apply it to my own day. It make *look* 'a bit lame' but it will insure me against being literally lame over the long-run (and save your institutions a few of your dollars regardless of whether I smoke the odd cigarette once in a while to contribute to Canada's revenue stream in whatever small way I still can). The framework is the simple triplet of sustain, create and transform (Vishnu, Brahma, Shiva) that works to greater or lesser effect only to the degree with which I bring *myself* to the practice discerned through introspection. As you may surmise, ecology (sustain) is the foundational layer - either that or nihilism in the particular and personal, as well as the general are the long-term choices. To create and transform without first sustaining what we have is the mirage of perennially complacent consumption wrought by sleepwalkers mired in their simplistic and narrow sense of 'happy and whole': The Ouroboros. It's our choice: It's a heavy and humble thing for a species that once transcended subsistence to now confront the prospect of its non-existence. However that is what is to be done.

**Apply Terms and Conditions**

But he that prizes a soul which is rational, universal, and civic, no longer turns after anything else, but rather than everything besides keeps his own soul, in itself and in its activity, rational and social, and to this end works conjointly with all that is akin to him

~ Marcus Aurelius, Book VI - 7

Anarchy is often discredited particularly by the incumbency in western governance frameworks; you may call these 'giants' the [*Committee to Save The World*](https://marchingunderbanners.net/2008/03/26/the-committee-to-save-the-world-ten-years-on/)*.* They organize the summits you pay for where everything is a priority and 'on the agenda to be tabled for discussion, evaluation and triage'. They create the standard terms and conditions and we sign them all. Why not? They don't mean anything to anyone. In support of them are those ordinary largely innocent if ignorant foot soldiers who've bought in to the myth (call them the LinkedIn army). They are provided for with an allowance in the defaulted currency to subject to the continuance of the western democratic consensus. None of them will admit to any need or desire to objectively discuss alternatives to existing modes of political economy. They simply parrot the usual objections to anarchism; implying that the lack of rules entailed amounts to chaos (i.e. disorder and randomness). Alternatively they suggest that political theory and science is for the ivory towers and irrelevant to 'business' and quarterly earnings. Let's not even broach the subject of devotion, contemplation, and faith with them (they get all 'fundamentalistic' about it - so on this I agree with them).

Rather, the lack of hierarchically imposed often arbitrary rules make space for creativity. You no doubt have encountered examples of excruciatingly arbitrary pointlessness from your LinkedIn life where you're told without clear explanation to follow a set of rules that appear unintuitive and a waste of time. For example, I was once called to a meeting where we were to discuss why we were meeting and why we should continue to meet on a calendar-scheduled 'go forward' basis. Also on the agenda was the frequency with which these 'meetings' would occur.

I'll use the definition of a politically popular *term* to draw distinctions between the current liberal democratic 'LinkedIn' consensus and anarchy (naturally this is my own perspective - but I expect they're widely shared by anarchists). This is one example (and indeed the term anarchy is another). At the very least a fruitful discussion requires an acceptance of a counterparty's identity and affiliations as they themselves define them. But for now let's specifically let's look at the term **canvas -** Whichever definition of the term you take dictates the conditions you will live in (and leave in). Here is how I perceive the difference in the way that term is approached in political contexts by anarchists versus tradpo liberal democrats as well as their tradfi counterparts (they're the same - they just trade badges as they go through the revolving doors of 'govern-mint'):

Anarchist:  a blank surface for *creation*, *vision*, and *truth*. The artist begins with nothing but perhaps a common-sense notion of causality to bring structure and meaning to life. This is the realm of sincerity, subjectivity, and beauty. 

Liberal Democratic 'Consensus' of Homo Electus: To *pander*, *posture*, and *collect data to manage the ground game.* Reduce people to voters or demographics in order to feed them into their system. Voters are then free to judge outcomes (or leave the 'system'). See also 'gerrymander' and efficient allocation of lobby-issued financial resources for the manufacturing of electoral 'consensus' for further details.

That was an artistic, but I think, a fair turn as a short exercise in comparative political philosophy. Now let's turn towards an actual day and how an anarchist would approach it in practical terms. First of all, per Graeber, an Anarchist *behaves* as though he is in fact free.* So a 'Blue Monday' isn't a day of grind at the office but rather the startling blue of an azure sky and the limitless potentiality implied. I'm not kidding - it really is as simple as believing you're free and then creating the circumstances that permit the reality incrementally - simple but not easy**. Still too artistic? Ok, let's really get practical. I've spoken about two basic models for approaching an anarchists blank canvas with a sense of opportunity:

- Satyam, Shivam, Sundaram (Truth Divines Beauty): This is an abstract framework for discerning dissonance in a life created where order (i.e. a mimicry of a natural order) is desired but where chaos is found instead. Approaching a reality in life you introspect and conclude is it beautiful (in your own opinion does it imply 'good taste' for example)? If it does not, is there something about it that attracts you to change it and do you have the requisite courage? If not, it is repellent and you avoid it (however there is a limit to how many people can do this and for how often and how long before holistically a system fails - that's fine we all vary in our appetites developed to assume and manage risk.
- Sustain, Create, Transform (Vishnu, Brahma, Shiva - the *trimūrti* of Hindu philosophy): This one has value for structuring a practical approach to life without the rigamarole and palaver of schedules - that's what you know because that's all you've been taught - do this then just because. Don't throw away your phone or calendar - use those with the rest of the world (you're really asking too much otherwise). I found David Allen's [Getting Things Done](https://www.amazon.ca/Getting-Things-Done-Stress-Free-Productivity/dp/0143126563/ref=sr_1_1?sr=8-1) approach to managing tasks in contextual lists particularly useful and still use it that approach to batch work. *You* however start *your* day with 'sustain' (there's nothing anarchic about foregoing the daily rituals of good mental and physical hygiene). In any case, for me sustain generally means:

**Sustain**

1. hydrate (currently I'm taking AG1 as a crutch while I get the 'system' out of me and I'm not at my 'nutritional best'. I generally just start with a mason jar of water with a teaspoon of salt and lemon juice
2. 4-7-8 Breathing - two minutes
3. 20 minutes seated meditation practice
4. [GMB ](https://gmb.io)Focused Flexibility 10-15 minutes
5. Coffee and 'Easy A' Creative (the above is effortful so I take a 30-60 minute break to do something easy - write and drink coffee)
6. Training (currently GMB's Integral Strength)
7. Breakfast (smoothie) - the Beet Surrender or [Machado](https://transition-insight.com/transition-insight/f/food---mostly-plants?blogcategory=Imprimatur+(Tout+Suite)) (we are mobile and prefer to *blend*)
8. Shower (no soap) - one cold minute drip dry, etc.
9. Obviously sustenance (food, not too much mostly plants and water).

**Create**

The rest of the day is for 'harder' *effortful* creative and study. Currently for me this is acoustic guitar theory*** and literature relevant to my own calling (Kropotkin, Proudhon etc.) You create in a fields - ones you're naturally [attracted ](https://transition-insight.com/transition-insight/f/attraction)to and have discovered this through introspection and being curious about what kinds of things you're drawn to.

Mandatory for me in extending Transition Insight and making the case for change: Building models to yield understanding and develop real practical solutions in governance as well as making the case for proof-of-stake protocols. Currently I'm still making the transition that David Graeber asked of us - to behave as though we are free and a part of that is turning away a lot of the coping mechanism that give us relief or catharsis required for life in repressive corporatist structures - the soft self-hate weekend binge to drown the fact that you're being bought and sold - ever more nihilistic unless arrested. The adjustment out of that hell implies an adjustment and a bit of 'chop' as I structure my pursuits. If and when I move into discussion and collaborative modes that I'll have a bit more collaboration, things will be less improvisational - but with smaller groups aligned on values who could care less the accumulation of capital but rather its broader distribution.

**Transform**

This can really only be understood by doing and forgetting oneself in the flow of create. Whether collaborative or alone it's open and yielding to disparate views without boundary but obviously set it a civic context.

Transform is like a lot of things we do, self-similar. It happens in moments, over weeks, and it happens over decades (I've talked elsewhere about the transformation that comes in stages of life - we have rites of passage in our communities to express this idea.

As I come out of the dominant western paradigm (call it the [Washington Consensus](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Washington_Consensus)) - one that has comprehensively failed and lost basic legitimacy, I remain far from my best - like many others less privileged than I to be sure - but even a few of us from deep within the paradigm are setting out to frame alternatives and actually choosing to be a part of them. I've worked through a lot of it and what excites and motivates me is the sheer heterogeneity of modern civilization beyond that dominant paradigm and the opportunity, having woken up from my own zombie sleep-walk, afforded to immerse myself in the planet. I cannot wait to get to Istanbul, Lagos, Karachi, Tehran, Petrograd or even Jaffa. Anywhere but DC's comic strip mall will do. Chiapas or Oaxaca?

As well some of that really comes down to opportunity and timing. Like most people I'm at my best when social connection is afforded which just isn't unavailable to me at this point - there's nothing to be done about that. I just bide my time and work with what's put in front of me. The one thing about a job you miss are people - bullshit or not, we're social animals and losing that takes a while to get used to. The transition isn't cut and dried - the 'liquidity' doesn't always line up, and I am, shall we say parsimonious (i.e. conservative but forward looking with a view to keeping powder dry as it were). I'm coaching myself here as well to 'go without and suck it up'. Temperamentally I tend towards Sparta rather than Athens and I *kinda* get off on cutting close to the bone and taking every last morsel of meat off the wing. What I don't want is to look back at the end and dwell on time spent on the extraneous and pointless (especially when it is so destructive to the commons) - and that's key to what I'm doing.

I expect to live long so patience is called for. There are difficult moments and you grapple with them the best you can understanding that not everything is within your control; accepting that is stoicism: It's a practice, not perfect - something you continuously *approach* and like everyone else that ever lived you reach it when you're done - and back home with the Universal.

In terms of jobs though, I could be wrong but right now at this minute, institutionally there isn't one that someone else younger needs or wants more and systemically there's nothing more productive right now that the work I'm doing here. *This is what I think you need me to be doing;* articulating an alternative vision, however imperfectly, and making it freely available to everyone.  I do believe we need to evolve in the way we live and I feel a sense of urgency about that; and the paradox is that it amounts to *not* feeling a sense of urgency for doing, but rather simply just being - and slowly letting go of urges altogether.

If I am to begin with sustain (both myself and my world) then I cannot see how being on the LinkedIn circus working for passive vehicles for generating quarterly earnings denominated in fraudulent notional tokens fits anyone's idea of sanity. So that's a bridge I've burned with finality.

All the burning bridges That have fallen after me All the lonely feelings And the burning memories Everyone I left behind Each time I closed the door Burning bridges lost forevermore

~ Mike Curb Congregation (Burning Bridges)

**Burning Bridges:**

<iframe class="VideoIframe__iframe___2ebvN" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/radsTxo06oM" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen="" title="Embedded Video"></iframe>

Above: Mike Curb Congregation's Burning Bridges from the War/Heist film Kelly's Heroes was synchronous with the end of the Gold standard in 1972 as the (rather expensive) Vietnam War raged. Hence [Kelly's](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Csv1wXOr5tY) line: 'This bank’s not gonna fall into the hands of the American Army. It’s gonna fall into our hands. You see, we’re just a private enterprise operation'. The film, a favourite of mine as a kid, was a satirical take on the military-industrial (bureaucratic) complex and it's utter bankruptcy. I was three at the time - it took a while for me to catch on - and then to actually kick on.

*There's is a degree of trauma in this situation. It is actually enormous and I know because I have felt it and it's why so many (particularly of my generation have been alienated to the point they took their lives). Tearing away from the Matrix is how I would frame it or burning bridges that it makes no sense to cross - because you've arrived. Even Neo second-guesses himself and for a while regrets it over gruel - and we all remember how Cypher punked him - that is the resistance: "we know the planet's in danger but we've worked out the schedule so let's just slow it down a bit. Yes lives are important but job are also just as important - everything is a priority. 

** We are at a civilizational hinge—poised uneasily between the Last Man’s comfortable nihilism and the Übermensch’s burden of self-created meaning. The dog has been let loose, but still returns to the porch—hurt, confused and forlorn - unsure what to do next. But this disorientation and spin is part of the process; necessary, because our current modes are simply not working. We ‘killed God’—that is, we discovered the power of secularism. A Faustian bargain, it came with the real prospect of moral relativism and nihilism. The complexity of our age cannot be managed with business administration. (Whether public or private is beside the point.) 

***I recommend [Tony's Acoustic Challenge](https://tonypolecastro.com/home/) for a comprehensive technical daispring for the additional Fretboard Wizard for theory. 

Dedication: For Ian Curtis of Joy Division who lived his vocation without making it to *the* New Order. I first heard the song in East London. It was 1983 and I had just turned fourteen.

~ [Ashit Milne](https://ashitmilne.com) (Planet Come Together)